INTRODUCTION

5. Dialogus Form. Evidently Cicero was well pleased

with the Cato Maior. In fact, he says he found it hard to
realize that he himself wrote the words instead oi Cato, in
whose mouth he had placed them (Laelius, ξ 4). By adopt-
ing the dialogue form, as used by Plato and Aristotle, he
had given it naturalness and vivacity, while the speak-
ers were introduced only to give occasion for the discus· ,
sion, and to direct it in the desired channels. The form
pleased Cicero so much that when he wrote the Laelius he
adopted the plan of the Cato Maior exactly, andin places,
even the same sentence structure (Laelius, ξ 16 and Cato .
Maior, §d 6 and 15). At times he is handling the same
authorities or is continuing the same line of thought (Lae-
lius, ξ 13and Cato Maior, ἕξ 78-83), and addressing his ,
hearers in the same way (Laelius, ξ 33 and Cato Moror,

«ξ 39). Numerous references to the Cato Maior in the ex-
planatory notes show the close relationship between the
essays.

It was customary at Rome, as everywhere, to idealize the
past and praise the men oi former times. Writers were
continually longing for the virtues oi the sterner, hardier
age just gone, and from the past were quoting examples of
heroism‚ integrity, and wisdom for the inspiration of the
present generation. Cicero was no exception to this rule.
Hestates plainly that he assigned the discussion of old age
“to the old man, Marcus Cato, in order that the speech
might have greater weight” (Cato Maior, ξ 3). The dis-
cussion oi friendship is also assigned to oue whose words
of wisdom would carry conviction with the Romans, who
were looking back to better and wiser generations. Cicero
again frankly states to Atticus his purpose in dating the
dialogue back to the time of the younger Scipio Africanus
and tries to give it greater semblance of reality by remind-

ing Atticus of his, intimacy with one of the characters.
11

 

